---
yep: 102
title: Daemon Configuration Files
author: Kyle Sunden
status: accepted
tags: standard
post-history: 2020-04-14
              2020-07-02
---

# Abstract

This YEP describes the configuration file format for yaq daemons.
This is a TOML file with some reserved and required keys.
A single config file has a 1-to-1 relationship with an invocation of the [entry point](../104).
This MAY be a 1-to-many relationship with individual daemons.
Typically, there is ONE configuration per `<kind>` of daemon.
For example, if you have multiple of the _same_ make and model translation stage, you can configure _all_ of them in a single configuration file.

# Table of Contents

[TOC]

# Motivation

A standard for configuration makes it easy to know how one configures their daemon.
TOML is a well defined, human readable configuration file format.
This provides a flexible configuration format, including the ability to share settings across multiple daemons.

# Specification

The configuration file is a [TOML](https://github.com/toml-lang/toml) file.

## File Location

The default configuration file location SHALL be:

- macOS: `~/Library/Application Support/yaqd/<kind>/config.toml`
- XDG Spec (e.g. Linux): `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/yaqd/<kind>/config.toml`
- Windows: `C:\Users\<User>\AppData\Local\yaq\yaqd\<kind>\config.toml`

Where `<kind>` is a lowercase name for the daemon with words separated by hyphens, as returned by the `id` method.
`<kind>` SHOULD NOT begin with "yaq".

If the desired config file is located elsewhere, it MUST be explicitly provided.

## Shared Settings

An optional top level table, `shared-settings`, which (if present) provides defaults that apply to all other tables.
These defaults are higher priority than protocol defined defaults, but lower than configuration for individual daemon ports.

## Individual Daemon Configuration

Every other top-level key MUST be a table, for which the name indicates the name of the daemon which MUST be exposed on the given port. These names MUST be unique at the level of `<kind>`.

The keys which are expected for a given daemon are specified using the Avro protocol file as described in [YEP-107](../107).

Each table MUST include a key `port` which provides the globally-unique (among all daemons) TCP port.
Additional fields MAY be added, as needed for configuring the daemon.
Keys which are required (or optional) MAY be specified by the daemon [protocol](../107).

ALL tables other than those that are disabled, and `shared-settings` MUST be started when invoking a daemon entry point with the config file.
They MAY (and in many cases must for technical reasons) start several daemons listening in the same process.
A special key, `enable` (defaults to `true`) allows you to selectively turn off individual daemons.

The configuration file MUST NOT be written by the daemon.
Any runtime dynamic fields SHOULD be written in the [state file](../103) and have ways of detecting and/or expose setting over the TCP communication protocol described above.

Additional identifying information SHOULD be included, as applicable.
Common identifying information include: `make` (manufacturer), `model` (identifies the kind as described by the manufacturer), `serial` (individual serial number of the device represented).

The configuration file MUST be read from the file at daemon startup ONLY (restarting is considered "startup", and MUST re-read the configuration file in case changes were made).

# Discussion

Discussion can be found on the [gitlab issue](https://gitlab.com/yaq/yeps/-/issues/3) for this YEP.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
