---
yep: 311
title: has-mapping
author: Blaise Thompson <blaise@untzag.com>
status: draft
tags: trait
post-history: 2020-10-29
---

# Abstract

This YEP defines the concept of "mapping" arrays.
These arrays add additional "context" to the channel arrays defined by is-sensor ([YEP-302](https://yeps.yaq.fyi/302/)).
For example, a mapping might describe which wavelength of light falls upon each pixel of a spectrometer array detector.

# Table of Contents

[TOC]

# Motivation

Certain sensors contain important information beyond their raw values.
Consider an array-sensor within an optical [spectrometer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spectrometer).
Such an array detector could be implemented according to the is-sensor trait ([YEP-302](https://yeps.yaq.fyi/302/)), with a channel for the measured light intensity at each pixel.
To use this information, however, clients must also know the relationship between pixel index and light wavelength: the "mapping" of the array detector.
This YEP defines a trait which allows daemons to expose mapping information over a consistent interface.

# Specification

This trait requires is-sensor ([YEP-302](https://yeps.yaq.fyi/302/)).

This trait implements mappings as a collection of arrays completely separate from channels.
The principle feature of this trait is the new message `get_mappings`.

## message: get_channel_mappings

response: {"type": "map", "values": {"type": "array", "items": "string"}}

Keys being channel names.
Values array of keys from get_mappings.
Can be many mappings per channel, or no mappings for a given channel (empty array).

Mappings must have the same dimensionality as their associated channel.
Do not need to be the same size.
They must broadcast into their associated channel.

## message: get_mapping_id

response: int

Mapping ID.
This integer increments every time the mapping is updated.
Clients can safely check this id to verify that their cached mappings are correct, if desired.

## message: get_mapping_units

response: {"type": "map", "values": ["null", "string"]}

Must return units for every mapping.
Units can be null.

## message: get_mappings

response: {"type": "map", "values": ["double", "ndarray", "int"]}

Keys used in get_channel_mappings

# Rejected Ideas

At one point in yaq development, mappings were included simply as additional channels.
While elegantly simple, this idea proved insufficient.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
