---
yep: 1
title: YEP Purpose and Guidelines
author: Kyle Sunden
        Blaise Thompson <blaise@untzag.com>
status: accepted
tags: meta
post-history: 2020-04-22
              2020-04-23
              2020-07-02
              2020-07-05
---

# What is a YEP?

YEP stands for "yaq enhancement proposal".
YEPs are standards for use by the yaq ecosystem and community.
YEPs provide concise technical specifications for features and processes.

We intend YEP to be the primary mechanism for proposing new features of yaq, and collecting community input.
YEPs are meant as a way to garner consensus around an idea, and documenting dissenting opinions.

YEPs are markdown files stored in a [git repository](https://gitlab.com/yaq/yeps), and their revision history is the historical record of the proposal.

Enhancement proposal comes from the term as used by the Python community.
In particular, python as a whole has [PEPs](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0001/).
Similar processes are also used by [numpy](https://numpy.org/neps/), [matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/stable/devel/MEP/index.html), and others.

# YEP Index Numbers

YEP index numbers are assigned by the core team.
In general, they will be assigned in ascending order, but exceptions may be made.

YEPs are roughly categorized by:

- <100 Are Meta/Process YEPs about the procedures of the yaq ecosystem as a whole
- 100s are Standard track yeps, things that an implementor would need to know
- 200s are reserved for future use.
- 300s are Trait Specifications

# YEP Status

YEPs have only three available status codes:

- draft (start here)
- accepted
- rejected

# YEP Tags

YEPs can have tags to help categorize their behavior.

Current tags are:

- `meta`: YEPs about YEPs
- `standard`: YEPs which define standards an implementor would need to know
- `trait`: YEPs which define a Trait

# Submitting a YEP

The YEP submission project is not intended to be _challenging_, but is designed to encourage intentional, well reasoned changes to the yaq ecosystem.
As such, there are a number of steps that should be taken in most cases.

## An Idea

If you have an idea for a new YEP, start by chatting with members of the community.
The [contact page](https://yaq.fyi/contact/) provides ways to reach out to community members.
It is generally a good idea to solicit feedback to ensure that the idea is both generally applicable and does not have any glaring negative consequences.
This will help to define the scope and consider alternate approaches to the same problem.
It can also save you time in the event that a similar idea was previously discussed and rejected (your idea may overcome the reasons it was rejected, but if it doesn't, there is no reason to spend time preparing a formal YEP).

## Submitting a YEP

YEPs are tracked in a [GitLab repository](https://gitlab.com/yaq/yeps).
After getting initial feedback informally, you can start to write a formal specification.
This occurs via a GitLab [merge request](https://gitlab.com/yaq/yeps/-/merge_requests).
Submitters with commit privileges may simply branch, outside contributors must first fork the repository.

Within the `yeps` folder, copy `yep-012.md` into a new file with file name `yep-XXX.md` where `XXX` is the yep number.
You can suggest a number, but it may be changed prior to acceptance as a draft.
If you do not know, use `999`.

Update the metadata, including the YEP title and your name in the `author` field.
Fill out he sections in the body of the YEP as you see fit.

Create an issue to discuss the YEP, and link to it in the Discussion section of the YEP.
Finally, submit via a Merge Request.

## Initial Review

The yaq team will start by giving a quick look at the file.
Things like formatting errors and minor mistakes may be considered at this time, but importantly the initial review does _not_ mean the YEP is final and accepted, only open for broader discussion.

We may reject the YEP at this stage.
Grounds for dismissal include poorly defined scope/reasoning, significant backwards incompatibility, and duplication of effort.

This initial review may go back and forth to provide clarification.
In particular, metadata in the Header should be largely correct and complete (aside from appending dates to the post-history, of course).

Once satisfied, the draft YEP will be merged, the YEP number will be fully claimed and permanent, and the open review period will begin.

## Open Review

In this stage, anybody in the community may comment on the YEP, with the YEP author responsible for responding to comments, and editing the text via additional merge requests.
Most merge requests during this phase are likely to be accepted, but serve as way to trace the changes and resolution of discussion points.

The length period is not defined, lasting only long enough that the Core Team has a consensus, feels the community has had an opportunity to comment, and discussion points are resolved.

## The Decision

A Core Team member will open a Merge request changing the status of the YEP to "accepted" or "rejected".
A different Core Team member will merge the request, and should do so with consensus of the core team.

# What belongs in a YEP?

Each YEP typically has the following parts:

- Header -- Provide metadata including the index number, title, and author
- Abstract -- A short description of the issue being addressed
- Motivation -- An explaination for why the YEP exists (or should exist).
                YEPs without sufficient motivation mmay be rejected outright.
- Specification -- The precise technical description of the proposal.
                   This should be detiled enough to allow interoperable implementation
                   in multiple languages.
- Backwards Compatibility --  All YEPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must
                              include a section describing these incompatibilities and
                              their severity.
                              The YEP must explain how the author proposes to deal with
                              these incompatibilities.
                              YEP submissions without a sufficient backwards
                              compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.
- Rejected Ideas -- Ideas to address the issue at hand which were rejected for one
                    reason or another, with brief reasoning why the chosen proposal is
                    preferred.
- Discussion -- A link to the discussion issue on GitLab.
- Copyright -- Each new YEP must be  under a dual license of public domain and
               [CC0-1.0-Universal](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/cc0-1.0/)
               (see this YEP for an example).
               If the YEP content builds on other copyrighted material, that should be
               acknowledged (see [YEP 100](../100) for eample)

[YEP 012](../012) is a template that makes remembering these sections easy.
This is not a hard and fast rule, some YEPs may be more logically broken down into different sections.

# YEP Header Information

Each YEP must begin with a header which includes metadata about the YEP:

```
---
yep: 1
title: YEP Purpose and Guidelines
author: Kyle Sunden
        Blaise Thompson <blaise@untzag.com>
status: draft
tags: meta
post-history: 2020-04-22
              2020-04-23
---

```

These headers are parsed by [a library](https://python-markdown.github.io/extensions/meta_data/) to help render the website and [index](../000) page.
Please include the `---` markers, and note that blank lines are NOT allowed in this block.
The YEP index number must be confirmed by a member of the core team, though you may suggest one.
The title should be short and descriptive.
The Status and tags are as described above.
Tags are newline delimited.
Authors are newline delimited, must be indented, and emails are optional.
Dates are in [ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html) format (date only) and are newline delimited.

# Updating YEPs

Each YEP has a corresponding GitLab issue linked in the YEP.
This issue is where discussion on the YEP should typically take place.
If there are new discussion points, closed issues can be reopened.
Additional issues regarding YEPs, if created should have their contents reproduced in the official discussion issue.
However, if extended discussion takes place in an alternate issue, they should also be linked in the Discussion section of the YEP.

Updates are performed using GitLab Merge Requests to the [yeps repository](https://gitlab.com/yaq/yeps) which update the markdown files in the `yeps` folder.
Updates to YEPs MUST achieve consensus among the core team.

# Discussion

Discussion can be found on the [GitLab issue](https://gitlab.com/yaq/yeps/-/issues/7) for this YEP.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
