---
yep: 310
title: has-measure-trigger
author: Blaise Thompson <blaise@untzag.com>
status: draft
tags: trait
post-history: 2020-07-14
              2022-08-01
---

# Abstract

This YEP defines the has-measure-trigger trait.
Daemons implementing this trait allow measurement to be software triggered over the yaq interface.

# Table of Contents

[TOC]

# Motivation

In many cases, it's relevant to tell a sensor "begin measurement now".
For example, you might wish to wait for a motor to arrive at its position before telling a sensor to make a measurement.
This trait standardizes this common sensor interface pattern within the yaq ecosystem.

Note that this trait builds on the is-sensor trait defined in [YEP-302](https://yeps.yaq.fyi/302/).
That trait defines a standard way of accessing the sensor data and metadata.
The scope of this trait is only the software triggering feature.

# Proposal

This trait requires is-sensor: see [YEP-302](https://yeps.yaq.fyi/302/).

The principle feature of the has-measure-trigger is the addition of the `measure` method.
This method can be called to initiate a measurement.
Because measurements might take some time to complete, the `measure` method does not wait to return the results of the measurement.
Instead, it merely returns the `measurement_id` of the measurement that was initiated (the "next" measurement).
Clients will use the messages defined by [YEP-302](https://yeps.yaq.fyi/302/) to access the data once the measurement is complete.
Clients will be assured of measurement order by comparing the `measurement_id` returned by `get_measured` to tme `measurement_id` that was returned by `measure` previously.

has-measure-trigger does not change the fundamental nature of `measurement_id` as described by [YEP-302](https://yeps.yaq.fyi/302/): `measurement_id` increments when the channel values are changed.
That is, when a measurement completes.
The `measurement_id` returned by `measure` can be thought of as the id of the NEXT measurement.
The value returned by `measure` will never be the same as returned by `get_measurement_id`.

The fact that a measurement can be initiated implies that daemons implementing has-measure-trigger can, at some times, be not measuring.
We tie the state of busy to the act of measurement.
A daemon will remain busy as long as it is actively measuring and will release busy once it becomes idle again.
This is natural in many orchestration situations where software will want to wait for all sensors to finish measuring before proceeding.

It's very important that the behavior of the `measure` method is consistent, especially with respect to order.
One crucial detail: what happens when `measure` is called during a measurement?
In this case daemons implementing has-measure-trigger MUST return the `measurement_id` corresponding to the currently ongoing measurement.
They MUST NOT halt the ongoing measurement.
If a `measure` command is recieved during an ongoing measurement, that DOES NOT imply that the daemon should "remember" to initiate a new measurement once the ongoing measurement finishes.
`measure` will only initiate a measurement if the sensor is idle at that time.

As an auxillary feature to `measure`, this trait defines the concept of "looping".
A looping sensor will "self-trigger" as quickly as it can.
This implies that the sensor will always remain busy.
Looping state is set by the argument `loop` to `measure`, default false.
A configuration option `loop_at_startup` and a message `stop_looping` must also be implemented.
Conviniently, a looping sensor behaves exactly like the generic sensor described in [YEP-302](https://yeps.yaq.fyi/302/).
Clients that aren't interested in micromanaging order of measurement with respect to acquisition flow will find this convinient.

## config: loop_at_startup

type: boolean

default: false

If set to true, the daemon will begin to loop measure as soon as it starts.
By using this config, users may ignore software triggering and treat this sensor as a pure asyncronus measurement device.

## message: measure

parameter: loop: boolean
parameter: loop: default: false

Initiate a measurement. Returns integer, measurement ID.

## message: stop_looping

Stop looping measurement.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
