---
YEP: 100
Title: yaq-RPC
Author: Kyle Sunden
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 2020-04-13
yaq Version: 1.0
---

# Abstract

This YEP describes an updated [remote procedure call](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call) format.
In brief, the format is largely based on [JSON-RPC v2](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification), however using [msgpack](https://msgpack.org) for data serialization instead of JSON.
As such, all valid msgpack data types are available to use.
This is strictly a superset of what is allowed with JSON alone.

# Motivation

When the project started, we decided that a daemon architecture built on top of an RPC was greatly beneficial.
At the time, we chose JSON as the serialization because of its ubiquity and human readability.
The first implementation was an RPC interface of our own design.
We then found JSON-RPC, which was largely very similar to what we had come up with, but importantly had a standard written and a community of people using it already.

As time progressed, we found the JSON to be prohibitively verbose for sending large numeric arrays, and tthus looked to msgpack as an alternative that is more compact and can handle binary data.
This format is less human readable, but is more easily machine readable, and easily converted into human readable format.

This YEP addresses the standardization of this format.

# Specification

## Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

All member names exchanged between the Client and the Server that are considered for matching of any kind should be considered to be case-sensitive. The terms function, method, and procedure can be assumed to be interchangeable.

The Client is defined as the origin of Request objects and the handler of Response objects.
The Server is defined as the origin of Response objects and the handler of Request objects.

## Type System

Any valid [msgpack type](https://github.com/msgpack/msgpack/blob/master/spec.md) MAY be used.
For maximum compatibility with other serializers (e.g. TOML used for other parts of the yaq ecosystem), Mapping keys MUST be String types.

In addition to the standard types, the Timestamp extension is explicitly required by yaq-RPC.
Any extension types specified will be separate YEPs.

## Request Message

A rpc call is represented by sending a Request message to a Server. The Request message has the following members:

- **ver**:  A String specifying the version of the yaq-RPC protocol. MUST be exactly "1.0". Note that this name differs from the name in JSON-RPC.
- **method**: A String containing the name of the method to be invoked. Method names that begin with the word rpc followed by a period character (U+002E or ASCII 46) are reserved for rpc-internal methods and extensions and MUST NOT be used for anything else.
- **params**: A Structured value that holds the parameter values to be used during the invocation of the method. This member MAY be omitted.
- **id**: An identifier established by the Client that MUST contain a String or Integer value if included. If it is not included it is assumed to be a notification. The Server MUST reply with the same value in the Response message if included. This member is used to correlate the context between the two messages.

### Notification

A Notification is a Request message without an "id" member. A Request message that is a Notification signifies the Client's lack of interest in the corresponding Response message, and as such no Response message needs to be returned to the client. The Server MUST NOT reply to a Notification, including those that are within a batch request.

Notifications are not confirmable by definition, since they do not have a Response message to be returned. As such, the Client would not be aware of any errors (like e.g. "Invalid params","Internal error").

### Parameter Structures

If present, parameters for the rpc call MUST be provided as a Structured value. Either by-position through an Array or by-name through a Mapping.

- by-position: params MUST be an Array, containing the values in the Server expected order.
- by-name: params MUST be a Mapping, with String keys representing names that match the Server expected parameter names. The absence of expected names MAY result in an error being generated. The names MUST match exactly, including case, to The names MUST be Strings.

## Response Message

When a rpc call is made, the Server MUST reply with a Response, except for in the case of Notifications. The Response is expressed as a single msgpack Mapping, with the following members:

- **ver**: A String specifying the version of the yaq-RPC protocol. MUST be exactly "1.0". Note that this name differs from the name in JSON-RPC.
- **result**: This member is REQUIRED on success. This member MUST NOT exist if there was an error invoking the method. The value of this member is determined by the method invoked on the Server.
- **error**:  This member is REQUIRED on error. This member MUST NOT exist if there was no error triggered during invocation. The value for this member MUST be an Mapping as defined below.
- **id**: This member is REQUIRED. It MUST be the same as the value of the id member in the Request Message. If there was an error in detecting the id in the Request object (e.g. Parse error/Invalid Request), it MUST be Nil.

Either the result member or error member MUST be included, but both members MUST NOT be included.

### Error object
When a rpc call encounters an error, the Response Message MUST contain the error member with a value that is a Mapping with the following members:

- **code**: A Number that indicates the error type that occurred. This MUST be an integer.
- **message**: A String providing a short description of the error. The message SHOULD be limited to a concise single sentence.
- **data**:  A Primitive or Structured value that contains additional information about the error. This may be omitted. The value of this member is defined by the Server (e.g. detailed error information, nested errors etc.).

The error codes from and including -32768 to -32000 are reserved for pre-defined errors. Any code within this range, but not defined explicitly below is reserved for future use. The error codes are nearly the same as those suggested for XML-RPC at the following url (and exactly those defined by JSON-RPC): http://xmlrpc-epi.sourceforge.net/specs/rfc.fault_codes.php


| code | message | meaning |
| -------- | -------- | -------- |
|-32700| 	Parse error	| Invalid Message was received by the server. An error occurred on the server while parsing the Message.|
|-32600| 	Invalid Request| 	The Message sent is not a valid Request message.|
|-32601| 	Method not found	| The method does not exist / is not available.|
|-32602| 	Invalid params| 	Invalid method parameter(s).|
|-32603| 	Internal error| 	Internal yaq-RPC error.|
|-32000 to -32099| 	Server error| 	Reserved for implementation-defined server-errors.|

The remainder of the space is available for application defined errors.



## Batch Requests

To send several Request messages at the same time, the Client MAY send an Array filled with Request messages.

The Server should respond with an Array containing the corresponding Response mesages, after all of the batch Request messages have been processed. A Response message SHOULD exist for each Request message, except that there SHOULD NOT be any Response messages for notifications. The Server MAY process a batch rpc call as a set of concurrent tasks, processing them in any order and with any width of parallelism.

The Response messages being returned from a batch call MAY be returned in any order within the Array. The Client SHOULD match contexts between the set of Request messages and the resulting set of Response messages based on the id member within each message.

If the batch rpc call itself fails to be recognized as a valid message or as an Array with at least one value, the response from the Server MUST be a single Response message. If there are no Response messages contained within the Response array as it is to be sent to the client, the server MUST NOT return an empty Array and should return nothing at all.

# Backwards Compatibility

This breaks backwards compatibility at the interface layer.
However, the changes are localized to only the parts of code implementing the communication layer itself.
All downstream daemon implementations are unaffected, and client programs using `yaq` maintained generic client interfaces will be able to upgrade without changing their own code.

Daemons may have cause to utilize the new data types which are enabled by using msgpack rather than JSON, but that is entirely optional.

# Reference Implementation

Implementations in python for the [daemon](https://gitlab.com/yaq/yaqd-core-python/-/merge_requests/58) and [client](https://gitlab.com/yaq/yaqc-python/-/merge_requests/7) portions are provided.

# Rejected Ideas

## JSON-RPC v2

See [JSON-RPC v2](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification).
This was the existing implementation.

JSON-RPC is nicely quite simple. It is also relatively ubiquitous, and based on an even more ubiquitous serialization format.
msgpack was preferred for its berevity and increased type availability.
While not as ubiquitous, implementations exist for all of the most popular lanuages.

While the structure of the requests and responses was quite nice, JSON as a serialization language is relatively limited and much more verbose compared to msgpack.
The lack of binary data types in particular leads to explosion of extra communication bandwith needed, without actually transmitting additional information.
This becomes especially relevant as we look to support daemons sending large arrays of (usually floating point) numbers, where JSON requires sometimes as much as 2.5 times the number of bytes required.
Attempts to shoehorn in binary data are not satisfactory solutions, as they either end up using many escape sequences.

## msgpack-rpc

[msgpack-rpc](https://github.com/msgpack-rpc/msgpack-rpc/blob/master/spec.md) is an existing standard for doing RPC using msgpack.

In many respects, it is a very good specification.
Where it falls short for our use case is that we have come to rely on the ability to use keyword based arguments for the RPC. This is not supported by msgpack-rpc.

As such, strict compliance to the standard does not suit our usage.

Additionally there is not a particularly large (or at least vocal) community using the standard.

## zerorpc

[zerorpc](https://zerorpc.io) similarly does not provide for keyword arguments (though with a note for a suggested workaround).
The [zerorpc specification](https://github.com/0rpc/zerorpc-python/blob/master/doc/protocol.md) is listed as "incomplete", and has not seen updates in 5 years.

zerorpc is also rejected because it specifies more that we wish to specify here:
- zerorpc _must_ use ZeroMQ sockets
- zerorpc implements heartbeat, streaming, and other more complicated communication modes

## Opening an additional port for raw binary data

This was deemed a configurational and practical nightmare to organize and assure data integrity.

## Using base64 encoded binary data

See [a rejected implementation](https://gitlab.com/yaq/yaqd-core-python/-/merge_requests/31).

This was an idea for reducing _some_ of the size burden incumbent on JSON for transmitting large arrays.

Using base64 introduces additional complexity, and requires copying data into new memory locations, something that at least in theory can be avoided with msgpack in many cases.

# Discussion

Discussion can be found on the [gitlab issue](https://gitlab.com/yaq/yeps/-/issues/1) for this YEP.

# Copyright

Much of the specification text itself is mirrored from that in the [JSON-RPC v2 specification](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification). As such, their copyright notice applies to sections taken verbatim, or nearly so:

```
Copyright (C) 2007-2010 by the JSON-RPC Working Group

This document and translations of it may be used to implement JSON-RPC, it may
be copied and furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or
otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied,
published and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all
such copies and derivative works. However, this document itself may not
bemodified in any way.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be revoked.

This document and the information contained herein is provided "AS IS" and ALL
WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED are DISCLAIMED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR
ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
```

The remainder of the content is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
