---
yep: 104
title: Daemon Entry Points
author: Kyle Sunden
status: accepted
tags: standard
post-history: 2020-04-14
              2020-04-22
	      2020-07-02
---

# Abstract

This YEP defines the standard for entry points for yaq daemons.
The entry point executable name is defined as `yaqd-<kind>` where `<kind>` is a lower case name for the daemon with words separated by hyphens.
Additionally, this defines flags required on the entry points.
There is a 1-to-1 correspondance between entry point invocations and [YEP-102](../102) confguration files.
As such, multiple daemons MAY be started in a single entry point.

# Table of Contents

[TOC]

# Motivation

A standard for names and options available makes for a consistent, easy to swap out way of initiating daemons.

# Specification

The standard entry point to initiate a daemon SHALL be `yaqd-<kind>` where `<kind>` is a lowercase name for the daemon with words separated by hyphens, as returned by the `id` method of the daemon.

Examples of valid entry points include `yaqd-hardware`, `yaqd-micro-hr` , and `yaqd-zaber-binary`.

The entry point SHALL accept the option `--help` and the short form `-h` of this option, which prints usage information and exts without starting daemons.

The entry point SHALL accept the option `--config <filepath>` and the short form `-c` of this option.
Each daemon specified by the config file SHALL be started.
They MAY (and for technical reasons must in some cases) be served from the same process.

The entry point SHALL accept the option `--version` which prints version information, and exits without starting daemons.
The version of the implementation package (in whatever language) MUST be included.
Relevant versions such as core implementation and language MAY be included.
Each MUST be clearly identified.

The entry point SHALL accept the option `--log-level <level>` and the short form `-l` which sets the filter level of the log entries. The log level is the lower case name as defined in [YEP-106](../106).

The entry point SHALL accept the option `--verbose` and the short form `-v`, which is equivalent to `--log-level debug`, as defined in [YEP-106](../106).

The entry point SHALL accept the option `--protocol` which prints the [YEP-107](../107) Avro protocol json.

# Discussion

Discussion can be found on the [gitlab issue](https://gitlab.com/yaq/yeps/-/issues/5) for this YEP.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
