---
yep: 114
title: yaqd-controld Specification
author: Kyle Sunden <yeps@ksunden.space>
status: draft
tags: standard
post-history: 2022-07-19
---

# Abstract

This YEP proposes a standard special yaq daemon to expose functionality of `yaqd-control` over a yaq TCP interface.
Such a daemon provides the ability to configure daemons, start/stop/enable/disable background daemons, listing available daemons and informing of their status.

# Table of Contents

[TOC]

# Motivation

The tools provided by [`yaqd-control`](https://control.yaq.fyi) (and specifically the `yaqd` command line interface) are useful for managing daemons, but other than listing and checking status only work for daemons running on the local machine.
Additionally, this daemon could serve as a dynamic platform to build additional functionality useful for managing daemon states.

# Specification

`yaqd-controld` is a special yaq daemon serving on port 46000 (outside of the normal range for yaq daemons, not expected to appear in most list and status queries).

This daemon provides the following messages:

## `get_daemon_config`

parameter: `kind`: string

response: string

Get the contents of the config file for `kind`

## `edit_daemon_config`

parameter: `kind`: string

parameter: `body`: string

Write the contents of `body` to the config file for `kind`

## `start`

parameter: `kind`: string or list of string

Start a daemon or set of daemons running in the background service manager.

## `stop`

parameter: `kind`: string or list of string

Stop a daemon or set of daemons running in the background service manager.

## `enable`

parameter: `kind`: string or list of string

TODO: authentication story (password entry is currently interactive, not thrilled with passing in plain text over the network)

Enable a daemon or set of daemons in the background service manager.

## `disable`

parameter: `kind`: string or list of string

Disable a daemon or set of daemons in the background service manager.

## `list`

List known local daemons, providing host, port, kind, and name for each.
Provided as a map of record entries, formatting is client side.

## `status`

List known local daemons, providing host, port, kind, and name, online status, busy status for each.
Provided as a map of record entries, formatting is client side.

# yaqd-control cli changes

`yaqd` client entry point can then be updated to use the `yaqd-controld` backend when available, while defaulting to current behavior when not.

It can be made to be more dynamic, allowing additional parameters and/or interactive prompts to choose whether to run locally or remotely.

Sharing of known daemons across the network can be done via `yaqd-controld` rather than only by scanning, which can be a slow process.

# Future Directions

While not part of the initial specification, this daemon could be used a the basis to run more dynamic sets of daemons (i.e. running daemons in the background without using system service manager to persist across reboots).

Additionally, this daemon could be used to consolidate and query logs from running daemons.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
